---
layout: article
title: Markov Decision Processes (MDP)
tags: Richard_Sutton's_Reinforcement_Learning Reinforcement_Learning

date: 2022-04-30
sidebar:
  nav: "docs-en"
mathjax: true
mathjax_autoNumber: true
---

Learner and Decision-maker is __agent__.<br>
Things it interacts with, outside agent is __environment__

In a finite Markov Decision Process (MDP):

- The agent and the environment interact at discrete time steps, represented as $$t=0,1,2,\cdots$$.

- At each time step, $$t$$, the agent recieves some information about the environment's state, denoted as $$S_{t}∈ S$$. Based on this state, the agent selects an action, $$A_{t}∈ A(S)$$

- One time step later, the agent recieves a numerical reward, $$R_{t+1} ∈ \mathscr{R} ⊂ \mathbb{R}$$, and find itself in a new state, $$S_{t+1}$$.

- The interaction sequence follows the pattern: $$S_{0},A_{0},R_{1},S_{1},A_{1},R_{2},S_{2},A_{2},R_{3},\cdots $$

In a finite MDP, the probability distribution of the random variable, $$R_{t}$$ and $$S_{t}$$ depend only on the preceding state & action i.e., if $$s^{'}∈ S$$ and $$r ∈ \mathscr{R}$$, then

$$P(s^{'},r ∣  s,a) \dot{=} \text{Pr}\left\{S_{t} = s^{'}, R_{t} = r ∣  S_{t-1} = s, A_{t-1} = a \right\} \notag$$

The function _p_ defines the dynamics of the MDP. It is a deterministic function of four agruments,$$p: S × R × S × A → [0,1]$$ and specifies a probability distribution for each choice of state $$s$$ and action $$a$$ satisfying:

$$\sum\limits_{s^{'}∈ S} \sum\limits_{ r∈ R} p(s^{'},r ∣  s,a) = 1 \hspace{3em} \text{for all} s∈ S, a∈ A_{s} \notag$$

## Markov Decision Processes (MDP)

MDP, therefore, is a decision process in which the probability of each value for $$S_{t}$$ and $$R_{t}$$ depends only on the preceding state and action $$S_{t-1}$$ and $$A_{t-1}$$ and not on earlier state/action. In essence, if the state includes information about all aspects of the past agent-environment interaction, then the state is said to have a __Markov Property__.

Using the dynamic function, _p_, we can compute expected reward for state-action pair, denoted as $$r:S × A → R$$

$$r(s,a) \dot{=} \mathbb{E} [R_{t} ∣ S_{t-1} = s, A_{t-1} = a] = \sum\limits_{r∈ R} r \sum\limits_{s^{'}∈ S} p(s^{'},r ∣ s,a) \notag$$

Similarly, we can compute the expected reward for state-action-next state denoted as $$r:S× A × S → R$$:

$$r(s,a,s^{'})\dot{=}\mathbb{E} [R_{t} ∣  S_{t-1} = s, A_{t-1} = a, S_{t} = s^{'}] = \sum\limits_{r ∈ R} r \frac{p(s',r ∣ s,a)}{p(s^{'} ∣ s,a)} \notag$$

### Goals and Rewards

In Reinforcement Learning, goal of the agent is to maximise the reward, $$R$$ which can be stated as __reward hypothesis__ as _That all of what we mean by goals and purposes can be well thought of as the maximization of the exptected value of the cumulative sum of a received scalar signal (called reward)_. In other words, if the exptected return at time step $$t$$ is denoted by $$G_{t}$$ and the final time step is $$T$$, then

$$G_{t} = R_{t+1} + R_{t+2} + R_{t+3} + R_{t+4} + \cdots + R_{T} \notag$$

The objective is to maximise the cumulative reward received at each time step, $$R_{t+1}, R_{t+2},\cdots$$, and so on, ultimately maximising $$G_{t}$$

MDP tasks of maximising $$G_{t}$$ can be classified into two types: __episodic task__ and __continuing task__.

In __episodic task__, the agent-environment breaks into subsection called __episodes__. Each episode ends in a special state called a terminal state, and independent of how the previous episode ended. On the other hand, in __continuing tasks__, the agent-environment oesn't break into identifiable episodes and goes on continually without limit.

### Discounting

In some approaches, the agent selects actions, $$A_{t}$$ to maximize the sum of discounted return, $$G_{t}$$ over the future. It is defined as:

$$G_{t} \dot{=} R_{t+1} + γ R_{t+2} + γ^{2} R_{t+3} + \cdots  = \sum\limits_{k=0}^{\infty} γ^{k} R_{t+k+1}$$

Here, $$γ$$ is __Discount Rate__ and $$0 \le γ \le 1$$. Importantly, if $$γ= 0$$, the agent is concerned only with the maximizing immediate reward as the future terms $$γ  R_{t+2} + γ^{2}R_{t+3} + \cdots$$ become $$0$$.
On the other hand, if $$γ ≈ 1$$, the agent's return objective takes future reward into account more strongly.

Futhermore, if we look more closely into __eq(1)__, we can observe that returns on successive time steps are related to each other as:

$$
\begin{align}
G_{t} & \dot{=} R_{t+1} + γ R_{t+2} + γ^{2}R_{t+3} + γ^{3}R_{t+4} + \cdots \notag \\
& = R_{t+1} + γ(R_{t+2} + γ R_{t+3} + γ^{2}R_{t+4} + \cdots) \notag \\
& = R_{t+1} + γG_{t+1} \notag \\
\end{align}
$$

Note that it works for all time steps $$t \lt T$$ , even if termination occurs at $$t+1$$. Also, if $$G_{t}$$ is expected of consisting infinite terms where reward is non-zero and constant $$γ \lt 1$$, we can write $$G_{t}$$ as:

$$G_{t} = \sum\limits_{k=0}^{\infty} γ^{k} = \frac{1}{1-γ} \notag$$

### Value Function

Function of states (or of state-action pair) that estimate how good it is for the agent to be in the state. _('how good' is in terms of future rewards or expected return)_.

### Policy

Policy is mapping from states to probabilities of selecting each possible actions. If agent is following policy $$\pi$$ at time $$t$$ then $$\pi(a ∣ s)$$ is the probability that $$A_{t} = a$$ if $$S_{t} = s$$

Value function of a state under a policy $$\pi$$, denoted $$v_{\pi}(s)$$ is the expected return when starting in $$s$$ and following $$\pi$$ thereafter.

For MDP,

$$ v_{\pi}(s) \dot{=} \mathbb{E}_{\pi}\left[G_{t} ∣ S_{t} \right] = \mathbb{E}_{\pi} \left[ \sum\limits_{k=0}^{∞} γ^{k} R_{t+k+1} \mid S_{t} = s \right]$$

This eq(1) is __state-value function for policy $$\pi$$__. 

Similarly, value of taking action $$a$$ in state $$s$$ under a policy $$\pi$$, denoted $$q_{\pi}(s,a)$$ as the expected return starting from $$s$$, can be written as:

$$q_{\pi}(s,a) = \mathbb{E}_{\pi} \left[ G_{t} \mid S_{t}= s, A_{t} = a \right] = \mathbb{E}_{\pi} \left[ \sum\limits_{k=0}^{\infty} γ^{k} R_{t+k+1} \mid S_{t} = s, A_{t} = a \right]$$

This eq(2) is __action-value function for policy $$\pi$$__.

- If an agent follows policy $$\pi$$ and maintains an average of the actual returns that followed each state encountered; then the average will converge to state's value $$v_{\pi}(s)$$ as no.of times state is encountered approaches $$\infty$$.

- If separate average are kept for each action taken in each state, then average will converge to action-value $$q_{\pi}(s,a)$$ These estimation method are called __Monte Carlo methods__.

For any policy $$pi$$ and any state $$s$$, the following consistency condition hold between the value of $$s$$ and the value of its possible successor states:

$$ 
\begin{align} 

v_{pi}(s) &\dot{=} \mathbb{E}_{\pi} \left[G_{t} \mid S_{t}=s \right] \notag\\
& = \mathbb{E}_{\pi} \left[R_{t+1} + γG_{t+1} \mid S_{t} = s \right] \notag \\
& = \sum\limits_{a} \pi(a ∣ s) \sum\limits_{s^{'}} \sum\limits_{r} p(s^{'},r ∣ s,a) \left[r + γ \mathbb{E}_{\pi} \left[G_{t+1} \mid S_{t+1} = s^{'} \right]\right] \notag \\

v_{pi}(s) &=\sum_{a} \pi(a ∣ s)\sum\limits_{s^{'},r} p(s^{'},r ∣ s,a) \left[r + γv_{\pi}(s^{'}) \right] 

\end{align}
$$

This eq(3) is __Bellman Equation for $$v_{\pi}$$__. It expresses a relationship between the value of state and the value of its successor states.

### Optimal Policies and Optimal Value Functions 


A policy $\pi$ is defined to be better than or equal to policy $$\pi^{'}$$ if its expected return is greater than or equal to that of $$\pi^{'}$$ for all states i.e., $$π \ge  \pi^{'}$$ if and only if $$v_{\pi}(s) \ge v_{\pi^{'}}$$

Therefore, __Optimal Policy__ is a policy that is better than or equal to all other policies. However, it can be more than one. We denote all these optimal policies with $$\pi_{\ast}$$, and they all share same state-value function called __optimal state-value function, $$v_{\ast}$$__ defined by:

$$ v_{\ast}(s) = \max\limits_{\pi}v_{\pi}(s) \notag$$

Optimal policies also share same _optimal action-value function_, $$q_{\ast}$$, defined by:

$$q_{\ast}(s,a) \dot{=}\max\limits_{\pi} q_{\pi}(s,a)$$

For the state action pair $$(s,a)$$ this function gives the expected return for taking action $$a$$ in state $$s$$ and thereafter following an optimal policy. Thus, we can write $$q_{\ast}$$ in terms of $$v_{\ast}$$ as follows:

$$q_{\ast}(s,a) = \mathbb{E}\left[R_{t+1} + γv_{\ast}(S_{t+1}) ∣ S_{t} = s,A_{t} = a \right]$$

## Bellman Optimality Equation

It expresses the fact that the value of a state under an optimal policy must equal the expected return for the best action from the state. __Bellman Optimality Equation for $$v_{\ast}$$__ therefore, is:

$$
\begin{align}
v_{\ast}(s) & =\max\limits_{a ∈ A(s)} q_{π \ast}(s,a) \notag \\
& = \max\limits_{a}\mathbb{E}_{\pi_{\ast}} \left[G_{t} ∣ S_{t} = s,A_{t} = a \right] \notag\\
& = \max\limits_{a}\mathbb{E}_{\pi_{\ast}} \left[R_{t+1} + γG_{t+1} \mid S_{t} = s, A_{t} = a \right] \notag\\

v_{\ast}(s) & = \max\limits_{a} \mathbb{E} \left[R_{t+1} + γv_{\ast}(S_{t+1}) \mid S_{t} = s,A_{t} = a \right] \notag \\
v_{\ast}(s) & =\max\limits_{a} \sum\limits_{s^{'}r} p(s^{'},r ∣ s,a) \left[r + γv_{\ast}(s^{'}) \right]
\end{align}
$$

Similarly, __Bellman Optimality Equation for $$q_{\ast}$$__ is
$$
\begin{align}
q_{\ast}(s,a) &= \mathbb{E} \left[ R_{t+1} + γ \max\limits_{a^{'}} q_{\ast}(s_{t+1},a^{'}) ∣  S_{t} = s, A_{t} = a \right] \notag \\
& = \sum\limits_{s^{'}r} p(s^{'},r ∣ s,a) \left[r + γ  \max\limits_{a^{'}} q_{\ast}(s^{'},a^{'})\right] \\
\end{align}
$$